Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
Dear Dharma Friends, I respectfully invite you all to
join hands and recite the Buddha's name so that
we may share the Dharma teachings
regularly of the Namo
Buddha Shakyamuni Club.
[Music]
Namo Buddha Shakyamuni
[Music] Dear
Dharma Friends, as our
master often reminds us, there is a common
problem, which is that our master says it's
very funny: we
preach to everyone we meet, and when we first meet someone, we
don't know if they
agree to talk to us or not. So we just
force them to
listen to the Dharma wherever we go. We
teach
people without any karmic connection, for example,
without a karmic connection where someone
asks us for help, or there is
a close karmic connection where
we feel they are ready to
receive
our words, ready to
listen to our words, or we
can create a karmic connection.  There's some kind of karmic connection that
prevents people from being affected, or
like the karmic connection, for example, the
Buddhists in our club
have an agreement to
share and encourage each other. That's called a sufficient karmic connection. Anything that
doesn't have that sufficient karmic
connection is called something wrong, a
disease. In preaching,
this disease of preaching also gives rise to misconceptions, the misconception that
we have wisdom. So
let's find out if we are truly
wise or if we only
have a little knowledge. We are just
knowledgeable, so
when we have a little knowledge,
we mistakenly think we have wisdom, and
therefore we can develop ego.
So today, in
this Dharma-based sharing, I will also convey
to you, dear fellow practitioners, a
way to cure this disease called the disease of
knowledge. That is, yes, we have consulted
many sources, sometimes we listen a lot, and
then we just repeat what we've learned.
This "knowledge disease" is what we need to get rid of.
If we can cure
this "knowledge disease," our minds
will become calmer,
more tranquil, and we will be able to
discern what is right to
share when we should share what we have learned and what
we should not
share. It's called the "
knowledge disease," a disease that often leads to
uncontrolled teaching. That
is, even things
we've only just heard, things we don't yet
know whether they are right or wrong, we feel
they are things to
teach others. In Buddhism, this is
very frowned upon. Firstly,
if we are just listeners,
we must practice what the Buddha taught on
the day of A Lan. That is, "I hear," meaning "I hear
this," but "
I haven't
attained the truth yet, so I haven't verified it." That's just what
we hear. But what
we have attained,
we just say. That is, "I
see, I know, I understand."
That belongs to us, and what we
hear is just what we hear. As Buddhists, we
sometimes forget that.
This sutra reminds us so that
we can cure our own intellectual illness.
Buddhists should also cure
this intellectual illness, which is
not good for us. Regarding the sutra on consciousness, wisdom, and
life, dear fellow practitioners, please
listen again to
this lecture by Master Thich Truc Thai Minh. I
only picked out some ideas that are suitable for
our application. As
for explaining how life exists, how the
life of consciousness
exists, how the life of wisdom exists, the
sutra clearly explains it, and
the master has already explained it clearly, so I will only
briefly mention it. That is, life exists
due to dependent origination. For example, the life
of consciousness exists due to dependent origination, and the
life of wisdom
also exists within dependent origination. That is, it follows the
law of birth and death. I
will explain this in more detail later in the sutra,
because reading the entire
sutra is very long.  Since we haven't read the
entire sutra, what we need to
understand here is, firstly, to help
us Buddhists distinguish between
consciousness and wisdom, and how consciousness and wisdom differ,
and whether the locations of consciousness and wisdom are
different or the same. The sutra on consciousness,
wisdom, and the name of the king, Minanda,
asks the venerable monk, "Venerable, do consciousness and wisdom have the
same or different meanings?" The venerable monk Na replied, "The
meaning and terminology of consciousness and wisdom are
completely different." "Your
Majesty," the king said, "Please explain it to
me." The monk Na replied, "Consciousness is 'vin,'
meaning to recognize and gather all
knowledge and experience,
while wisdom is '
p,' meaning to clearly see and know
all things and phenomena as they truly are." "Your Majesty," the
monk Yen added, "to elaborate a little further, to
distinguish between consciousness and wisdom,
we must understand that knowledge and its
absorption.
To see whether we currently possess consciousness or
wisdom, consciousness is the
recognition and gathering of all knowledge and
experience. For example, Yen is just giving an example. Consciousness is the
recognition that...  When a
block of ice
touches our body, we say, "It's so cold!"
That means we recognize
the feeling, and the phrase "too cold" is
a conventional term used by the world;
that feeling is considered cold. But if
the same feeling is described differently by the world—as "
hot" or "cold"—that is,
our perception, combined with the
experience and knowledge of the world,
changes. For example, if
we call the feeling "hot,"
but the world says "
too cold," then when a hot piece of metal
touches our hand, we say, "
too cold!" For instance, in the
South and the North, the North calls it a
bowl for rice, while the South calls it a cup for rice.
So, when
our eyes come into contact with
this container, based on our knowledge and the
terminology of the North,
we call it a rice bowl. But
based on what we see, the
North calls it a rice bowl.  In the
South, people accept the
concept of a bowl as a
cup, and they immediately say, "This bowl
holds precious rice, Venerable Master." Therefore,
this consciousness comes from
one's own perception and the collection of worldly knowledge. This
perception means recognizing the sensations of heat and
cold, and the worldly knowledge is the
concept of "this is hot, this is cold." I'm
explaining this clearly so
we can all understand.
Consciousness is this perception; it
has one's own feeling, one's own knowledge
about the issue, and
combined with worldly knowledge,
it's called the consciousness of perception. That is
perception, meaning first, one recognizes, and
then gathers all the knowledge
and experience of the world. Recognizing and gathering all the knowledge and
experience of the world, for example, in
that world, there is a person called a super-intelligent, a
scientist,
when he is bathing in a bathtub
and he perceives the buoyancy of the
water—that is his perception.  After
he recognized it, he
began to invent the principle of the force
of
water, and then people called
that law the
Cimedes' law. That recognition and
that name, when we
receive it, is called the awareness and the
accumulation of experience from the world. Those of you who
understand this clearly see that
we all possess this awareness.
For example, visual awareness, the two senses,
that is, the six senses and the six objects of perception, give rise to this awareness. Wisdom, on the other hand,
is knowing
everything for sure, knowing the
true nature of things,
knowing clearly what their true nature is
without needing any
further experience. For example, when the Buddha attained enlightenment and achieved Buddhahood,
where did he direct his mind? At that time,
he attained the Threefold Knowledge, the Threefold
Wisdom.
These are three types of wisdom: First, the Knowledge of Past Lives, which
is the clear and insightful wisdom that
knows all past lives
of oneself and others.  All
living beings are born with specific names, knowing who their parents are,
what their occupations are, and what social class they belong to. That is,
when you direct
your wisdom towards this, you know the
true meaning of your past life
as well as the lives of all living beings. You know exactly
which life you want to be in, just
like
watching a movie. Clearly, you know everything,
what was said, what was done, just like in
real life, all in
that instant of focusing your mind. In
less than a split second, you know clearly –
that is Wisdom, my dear fellow practitioners. The
second type of Wisdom is the Heavenly Eye, the
clear and
insightful wisdom that knows all future lives
of yourself and all
living beings. For example, you know
where a person will go after death, who their family will be
born into, who their father will be, who their mother will be,
which hell they will go to,
or which heaven they will ascend to, and what kind of
happiness they will enjoy. For example, you know exactly what
actions
caused this person's
death and the karmic retribution they will receive in the animal realm.
What kind of creature it is, what its life is like, how it
dies, what misfortunes it encounters—
he knows it all. That is the Divine Eye, that
is Wisdom.
Furthermore, there is the Enlightenment, which is the clear and insightful Wisdom that
knows the
cause of all suffering
and how to eliminate it to attain
happiness and peace. That is Wisdom.
Therefore, we usually only
call ourselves intelligent, just intelligent,
but Wisdom must arise in this way.
We
dare to say we are just beginning to cultivate
wisdom, beginning to practice and acquire some
wisdom. The rest is just
knowledge, meaning we have income, we have knowledge, we have thought, we have experience, we
are practicing, but
that is not yet being a person with true Wisdom.
What part of Wisdom do we have? Wisdom is
seeing the true nature of all things.
We only have a part of it.  We have
n't yet achieved true wisdom;
we've only attained a part of it. For example,
someone hears the Buddha's teachings, saying, "If
you are currently
afflicted with this karma, then repent, make offerings, and
change your mind."
This person immediately follows the teachings and experiences it firsthand. If they find it to be
true,
then that's considered a small development of wisdom. That is, they
experience the Dharma and see it as the
truth within the Threefold Wisdom.
This wisdom has a demonstrative nature:
this is true, this is not
true. The wisdom has a demonstrative nature: this is true, this
is not true, this is the
truth, and this is not the
truth. The true nature of all
phenomena is to repent of past sins,
abandon evil, practice good, cultivate virtue, and correct one's mind to
achieve happiness and reduce
suffering. When we practice and
experience the Dharma in this way,
our wisdom is expanded. Remember,
wisdom arises from practicing the Dharma
and experiencing it.  Through this practice, we will gradually open up our
wisdom, which is why it's called "
study, contemplation, and practice." This practice is about
perfecting oneself within the
precepts. The precepts give rise to concentration and wisdom,
dear fellow practitioners. Therefore, our task
is to practice the
Dharma. Practicing the Dharma means observing the precepts,
and observing the precepts will generate wisdom, which in turn gives rise to
this wisdom. I have experienced this; this is the truth, this is the true nature of the Dharma. This is the true nature of the Dharma, the Dharma of happiness that I am experiencing. For
example, a husband and wife are having many arguments and
fights.
After studying Buddhist teachings, they say, "I
have this karma, this karma, controlled by
my mind in the present moment.
Now, what should I do to
increase my virtuous mind? I
can reduce that other mind, and then both of
them will become more harmonious. After a
while, they will find themselves more peaceful with
each other. These two people are said to have attained enlightenment.
To enter a part of the
Buddha's wisdom means to transform what belongs to the Buddha into
what belongs to us, dear fellow practitioners. For example, when
we study Buddhist teachings, we take the
Buddha's teachings, that is, we take that teaching plan
to cultivate and attain each level of enlightenment,
opening our own wisdom.
That teaching plan, we have succeeded;
it has become ours. At some
point, when we practice, we will
become an Arhat, dear fellow practitioners.
That is, at that time, that wisdom truly
belongs to us.
Why do we say that the Buddhas are the same? The
Buddhas before and the Buddhas after are the same because they
entered the same ocean of Buddhist teachings, they are the same,
not different, they both possess the Threefold Knowledge. The
Buddhas are the same, not different. The fully enlightened Buddha
also has the wisdom and skillful means to
save sentient beings; they have the same wisdom, not different,
dear fellow practitioners.
Therefore, we know
that whether we can open our wisdom or not depends on whether
we practice the Buddha's teachings to
eliminate the defilements in our minds.
We can open our eyes.  Wisdom,
however, if someone only goes to school, regardless of their
level of education, regardless of how much they memorize the
Buddhist scriptures,
but has not yet practiced, has not tasted
the taste of liberation—that is, has not made
their mind virtuous, has not
transformed their mind—then that person is
merely an intellectual. They may read,
learn, memorize, and speak, perhaps progressing from the
written to the conceptual—meaning they can speak, think, and
analyze—but without
practice, they cannot develop
wisdom. For example, Yen, while
speaking and sharing with the esteemed Dharma friends
here, may listen to the
teachings of Venerable Na-sien and think
very clearly, but if they do not
practice, they cannot open their wisdom, they
cannot awaken their enlightened wisdom. They
remain at the intellectual level, that is, they only gather their intellect.
Wisdom is opened through
gathering knowledge and understanding
worldly phenomena. Therefore,
if we only stop at gathering
knowledge,
we are merely...  It belongs to the intellectual class, but
if an intellectual goes around lecturing, it's
not the
purpose of a practitioner of the Dharma. Therefore, a
great Buddhist practitioner must abandon the disease of intellectualism,
which is only hoping to accumulate
a lot of knowledge to be able to speak.
That's not what I'm doing; I can only
speak according to circumstances. My circumstances
require me to speak to the scriptures, and whatever I speak
is what I'm teaching according to the scriptures. This is teaching according to the scriptures. As for
what I myself have cultivated and
what I affirm depends on
my own cultivation strength. There are also people who
gather a lot of worldly knowledge plus
Buddhist knowledge and then
reject what the Buddha has
said. For example, if someone talks about death and
rebirth in the six realms of reincarnation, they
say that there is no
such thing as the six realms of reincarnation. This is because they don't
have the ability to contemplate Buddhist teachings;
their wisdom hasn't opened
up, so their wisdom hasn't opened, and they
cling to worldly knowledge, thus
losing faith in the
Buddha. Therefore...  It doesn't obscure
anything, it doesn't create
any conditions for
us to be able to affirm that the Buddha's words
are true. Yen will explain this clearly:
when we cling to
worldly knowledge and become
infatuated, we become arrogant
in the pursuit of worldly knowledge. Yes, and
arrogant about knowledge—the
process of gathering a lot of information, including from
Buddhism—we become arrogant, infatuated, and
refuse to practice. Then we
lose faith, and without
faith, there will be no conditions
to help us anymore. We shouldn't cling to
knowledge, that is, crave knowledge
too much,
read too much, and
then become arrogant about knowledge. This
will block our path of practice and the
Buddha's teachings. It's very
detrimental. So,
that's what we should understand about
ourselves: whether we have wisdom
or are just knowledge. (
Reading a passage from a
dialogue between two wise men)  Regarding
consciousness and wisdom, this is where they
explain where the wisdom comes from.
Venerable Nāgānā said: "Wisdom also comes from
that awareness, from that consciousness; they
are not two different things. But
consciousness is easily mistaken, while wisdom
sees and knows correctly. Wisdom sees the true nature of
reality." "Your Majesty," he said, "the
awareness of consciousness is
governed by ignorance and desire, while the seeing and knowing of
wisdom is a clear, pure seeing
from enlightenment and liberation, not
obscured by ignorance and desire." "Your
Majesty," he replied, "that is, the source of wisdom—that is,
where is the source of wisdom and awareness?"
Nāgānā answered: "The source of wisdom
also comes from consciousness; it is not
somewhere else." "And the source
of consciousness is karma, my
esteemed friends," he said, "it is not located in the
eyes." Here, I'm just giving an example so
we can consider
the eye as consciousness. For example, let's consider the
eye as consciousness.  But this eye
looks to the left, it looks
to the left, but it sees five fingers as six.
This is called a mistaken view,
this mistaken view is called consciousness. And that same
eye looks to the right, it sees five fingers on the right hand, and it
sees that the
right hand has five
fingers, and it's not distorted.
This is called wisdom. That is, it still originates
from consciousness, but consciousness
perceives it as being
due to craving. It's like seeing a
flower in the eye, seeing five fingers as six.
Our craving
obscures wisdom, causing a
mistaken perception that is not true,
not true to the reality of things.
Therefore, the more we
listen to the scriptures,
the more we believe that we
can discover that source of wisdom
within ourselves, and we
have the motivation to strive.
Other sects say that everything is
due to one thing.  Someone has arranged it
all. If everything is already arranged, then there's no
more effort or striving. Because when you
see people in the world who have achieved so
much, who are very successful, suddenly
go downhill and everything collapses, they
say that someone has arranged it for them. And so,
they lose all motivation,
dear fellow practitioners. That is, the
mistaken belief, the superstition, leads
people to become pessimistic. But
when we study Buddhist teachings, we know that we
ourselves can generate
wisdom by learning the Buddha's teachings, simply by
eliminating the sources of
our own defilements. Then we will enjoy happiness and
peace from our own wisdom,
and we will be able to progress,
dear fellow practitioners. So, I'm only
sharing this part with you, dear fellow practitioners. The
rest of
this article also talks about the life
of consciousness and wisdom. The
life
of consciousness is like this: firstly, I have a wallet.
For example, visual consciousness sees a leaf
and says, "This is a leaf."
Then, this consciousness recognizes it as a hand.
These two consciousnesses
have arisen, and when Yen says, "I
see a hand, this is a hand," the
consciousness that recognized the leaf has
ceased to exist. Thus, in the realm of consciousness and
...  Wisdom arises according to conditions. For example,
when looking at a leaf, the visual consciousness arises,
recognizing it as a leaf. After recognizing it,
that consciousness ceases to exist. Then,
another condition arises: if you want to look at your own hand,
the
visual consciousness recognizes the
hand. So, the life of consciousness is due to
conditions. As for wisdom, it is constant.
Yen added more about the
life of consciousness and wisdom, and the
correlation in the scriptures we studied: the
life of consciousness is due to conditions;
consciousness only recognizes and
gathers worldly knowledge. That is, when
we want to gather worldly knowledge, consciousness arises to
remember and recognize
something, and when it recognizes it, that consciousness
ceases to exist. As for wisdom, the scriptures teach that
consciousness has a different function, and wisdom has a
different function. In other words, when consciousness is pure,
wisdom arises, dear fellow practitioners. That
is, when our consciousness...  When we are pure and free from greed, hatred, and delusion, then
wisdom arises. It's
not something we can just have whenever
we want. Consciousness arises from dependent origination; when dependent origination ceases, consciousness does
n't manifest. Wisdom
arises when our consciousness is pure,
meaning we see, know, and perceive without the ignorance and attachment of
the mind.
That's what the sutra
teaches us to understand. Therefore, for wisdom to arise,
our mind must be pure,
our consciousness must not be directed towards attachment. That's why
for practitioners to cultivate wisdom, they must use
precepts. Monks
use the 250 precepts, and nuns
use the 348 precepts, to purify consciousness and give rise to
wisdom.
Therefore, without precepts,
wisdom cannot arise.
Therefore, we must rely on and depend
on the Buddha's teachings to purify
our consciousness, that is, our awareness and
acquisition of knowledge. We shouldn't acquire
experiences from the outside world or
any other experiences; we must have experiences
from practicing and
attaining the Buddha's teachings, only then will wisdom
arise. So,
through this lesson, we must
correctly identify ourselves. We are not inherently
wise,
but merely intellectuals. Intellectuals are simply those who
perceive.
But wisdom arises from
reducing greed, hatred, and delusion. Those of you who
understand, reducing greed,
hatred, and delusion—that's when consciousness becomes pure.
For example, in
this same lesson, my master also spoke
about a time
when he was a layperson, a
very diligent practitioner. While
walking on the road, he
noticed someone
approaching from behind. When they came beside him, they would
say something—that awareness came from wisdom,
from the pure consciousness that was awakened.
Wisdom arises to know that, and there
was a time when the Master said that while meditating,
he saw the accident involving the
meditation vehicle at the monastery where he
was practicing. He
knew exactly when the accident would happen to the teacher
driving it. That
was precisely when he
was meditating, and his consciousness was completely
pure. That is, it was not
controlled by greed, it was not controlled by the mind's desire. It was cultivated and
purified, and at that
moment of purity,
wisdom arose, and that wisdom is what allows one to see and know.
Therefore,
we, as disciples of the Buddha, must
know that if we have not yet developed
wisdom, we must continue to cultivate
purity. If we develop even a little wisdom, it is
not
constant purity; it is only
a little purity, a little knowledge, and then it fades
away because we become greedy again,
then we become arrogant again after doing a little
work.  Then there's envy, then greed for fame,
then malice—the consciousness keeps recognizing it.
For example, when a malicious thought arises, the consciousness
records it, then
thinks of ways to harm
others, and records it again. So
this consciousness is always being tainted and corrupted.
That is, the consciousness has the
nature of recording and recognizing, dear fellow practitioners.
Now, if we give rise to a mind of
desire, the consciousness records
it, recognizes it as desire, and
records it again. How can it be
pure? How
can it give rise to wisdom?
Therefore,
we must use this consciousness to
recognize our own minds and rely
on the Buddha's teachings to eradicate our defiled minds.
This consciousness, today,
recognizes this defiled mind, and
recognizes our thoughts.
Eradicating that defiled mind, it
recognizes those thoughts.  The
method to eliminate mental defilements is to
purify the mind, dear fellow practitioners. I
'll give you an example to show you.
For instance, if our mind
is defiled, and we think, "I want to eat chicken," our consciousness immediately
records that thought.
Then we think, "I'll kill the
chicken to eat," or "I'll buy a chicken and kill it to
eat," and our consciousness records
that again. The consciousness always
records it like that. Because it's
defiled, it obscures it,
preventing the arising of
wisdom. But then, when we
have the thought of wanting to eat chicken,
our thought is, "Eating chicken means
killing the chicken. If I kill the chicken, I'll
suffer the consequences." The consciousness records that
thought as a pure thought.
This pure thought
leads to the conclusion, "I won't
kill the chicken to eat," and we control this feeling,
eliminating this feeling. This is
called purifying the consciousness, that is,
purifying the consciousness.  When it is purified, it
registers purity and
eliminates what was previously
registered, which was the idea
of ​​wanting to eat chicken.
Now, it has become loving the
chicken, not killing, and observing the precepts.
This becomes the seed of
pure consciousness, a seed of
pure consciousness, and so on, many seeds, many causes, and
so on, until it
becomes pure consciousness. And
this pure consciousness will give rise to wisdom,
dear fellow practitioners. That's it, today's
lesson, this Dharma that we are learning is
very beneficial, so we
know that wisdom will arise within us,
which is very happy, by
purifying our consciousness. Every time we
do something wrong, we turn
back to that event to purify
it, and the consciousness registers that
purity, not
that thought. But if we start by thinking about eating chicken,
then we buy a chicken, or we persuade
someone else to kill the chicken, then...  We ate a
chicken together, and I praised how delicious and well-behaved it was.
In the end, I had no further thoughts
about the chicken. That is, once satisfied,
the consciousness registers the entire
process as the result of an act of
killing. So the consciousness
registers it and it is obscured. Opening up the mind, calling it
defiled consciousness, prevents the arising of
wisdom. That's why, dear fellow practitioners, if
we understand this clearly,
we will joyfully practice diligently, cultivate and
enjoy contemplating the Dharma, and
enjoy practicing the Dharma to eliminate defiled thoughts. We
hope our consciousness
only registers pure things,
purifying our consciousness so that
wisdom arises faster. I wish you all,
dear fellow practitioners, to diligently eliminate
the disease of acquiring knowledge and the
disease of preaching the Dharma in a purely intellectual way.
If there is a need to
convey Buddhist teachings to gain
merit, we must know how to convey them,
not in the way our
master warned us—
forcing people to listen.  So, no matter
what kind of knowledge it is, whether it's Buddhist knowledge or
worldly knowledge, it's not
advisable to just listen and think without practicing. The disease that intellectuals suffer from is that
we Buddhists need to
avoid just listening and thinking
without practicing. If we don't
practice, we won't gain the
experience and realization.
We'll just listen and then think
wrongly, because each time
we think of it this way, we think of it that way, and
we'll be wrong. Yen will give just one
example, just one example. When I was little, I was about
five years
old. A group of kids were playing
together. Then one of
them asked, "
How do you become a
police officer?" I replied, "A normal person would be someone who
tries to
make a
police officer." So where does this knowledge come from? To
put it simply, when I was little, I
was at home in Ha Long Bay. There was the
sea, and my mother
kept buying things.  "Just buy
this fish, then kill it, then
marinate it in salt. If you marinate it in salt, it will
turn into a different kind of fish. Then you
marinate it in salt, dry it, and it
's still a fish, but it's different in
appearance and smaller. So, Yen
thought, 'From that way of thinking, from the
perception of the fish
being transformed, it's different.' At
that point, according to that way of thinking, I
thought, 'So, humans can also be
marinated in salt to transform, to become
different from normal people, to
become police officers.' That means I
didn't practice it, so I thought
that way, connecting one thing to another, and that way of
thinking was wrong,
dear friend. So, after
that incident, Yen was very confused. She said, 'I don't
know if it's right or not.' With that kind of thinking,
I answered
very strongly and confidently at that time, but
Mai still said, 'I'm still lucky not to have committed
the sin of false speech when I was little and had to ask my mother. I was
still brave enough.'"  Like the person
who clings to their ego or the person who boasts a lot,
and then sees
everyone listening with their mouths agape, and thinks it's right,
so they don't verify it.
If they fall into that trap, they will
continue to create karma. And so on and so forth, creating
karma. Then, when my mother came home from work, Yen started asking, "
Mom, Mom, how do I become a
police officer?" And my mother, I knew I had to go to
a wise person, someone who knew
more than me, to ask. If I asked
my peers who did
n't know and just discussed it, I don't know what would happen. So
my mother replied, "A
police officer is just an ordinary person, my dear, but they
have to go to school and get trained. Only then will they
know how to be a police officer." The
next day, I immediately said, "Being a police
officer isn't about being a salted fish; becoming a
police officer isn't about going to school and
then getting trained." That's how it was, dear fellow
practitioners. Therefore,
we Buddhists should avoid this kind of thing.  They hear
but don't practice, they just keep thinking and
piecing things together, thinking and
saying things like that, and they don't
bother to learn from wise people
or verify it. This
falls into the sin of false speech.
Therefore, the disease of intellectual ignorance among Buddhists
must be eradicated. If it's not eradicated, it's very
dangerous. This disease is even more dangerous than a
virus or bacteria in spreading
disease. Because viruses and bacteria spread
disease, they can kill a person in one
body, in one lifetime.
But this disease of intellectual ignorance involves hearing things, thinking
according to one's own understanding, piecing things together, and
then immediately declaring
it as cause and effect, or
something like that. That results in karmic consequences over many lifetimes, causing
great suffering. So let's all
work together to cure this disease of
intellectual
ignorance. I wish all of us to be more diligent
in curing this disease. And I
ask the congregation to clasp hands and
dedicate the
merit
to all
disciples and sentient beings so that they may all attain
Buddhahood.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]  [Music]
[Music] Taoist
medicine